I'm a Dromihaly. I used to work at Pyra, so maybe some of you know me from my six years
at Pyra company. Now I work at Omnifish, and we, with our cofounders and employees,
were a support class fish server. So back to the roots, kind of. But this time I'd like
to talk about Java, plain Java and Jakarta EE, and how it all fits together when we combine
that with AWS. So first, before I talked about AWS, let's ask why do we want to have Java
fast? Or do we want to have Java start fast? I think everybody wants that, but why? Because
it's cool. Or because we need it. So there were times when we really didn't need that,
when we had the application servers, it was a pain, that it took a while to start. But
in production it was already running, so there was no real business need for that, only to
make developers happy and be more productive with developing code. But now we have several
use cases where it's really needed, because the more time it takes for Java program to
start, it costs more money, and it's not user friendly. And one example, a perfect example
of this is AWS Lambda. So now, what is AWS Lambda? It's basically a service to which
you can deploy your code, and this service runs your code only when it's needed, and
it also charges you, because we need to pay for the cloud environment. But if we run the
code in Lambda, we are charged only for the time when the code is running. And that's
pretty nice, especially if we have code that usually just sits there and responds to users
just once in a while, or only during certain periods of time, especially during the day
or in the morning when there is some business activity. So how does AWS Lambda do that?
It basically creates environment and deploys our code when it needs to be executed. And
for that, if the code is not already deployed, it needs to create the runtime and initialize
our so-called function, because this is how our code is called. It's called a function,
because it's basically just called by the runtime, it gives some result, and then it's
thrown away. In reality, it's not always thrown away, because AWS Lambda tries to cache our
code so that it doesn't have to reinitialize it every time when it's run more frequently.
So sometimes it stays there, and then AWS Lambda can skip the initialization phase.
This is called warm start, because the code is already prepared to serve things. But if
this doesn't happen and the code is not available, it has to initialize everything, and this
is usually referred to as cold start, just start from scratch.
So the whole lifecycle of AWS Lambda is on the slide. You can see there's in its phase.
This is only when the code or the function is not initialized. So in case of cold start,
when there is a warm phase, which happens even for warm startups, there is this invoke
phase, which actually is the only productive phase from these three. It actually does some
job. The first phase only initialized gets some things ready before the application can
process requests. Then the invoke phase does the job. And then when AWS Lambda service
decides that it no longer needs our application running, because it's not doing anything right
now and AWS wants to use resources in some other way, it will tear everything away. So
it will shut down the environment. And then we're at square zero. And next invocation
needs to go through the initial initialization phase.
So let's now go back to the roots with plain Java application. And let's see or let's think
about how fast we can get with Java on AWS Lambda. Can we start Java really fast? I tried
to start a very simple Java program on my local machine. And if you do that, too, on
your computers, you will see that Java really starts fast. In my case, it was 50 milliseconds,
0.05 seconds. So very small fraction of a second, where JVM started, printed something
on output and finished. So we see on local computer, plain Java doesn't take very long
to start. If we compare exactly what's going on in AWS Lambda, because AWS Lambda needs
to initialize the environment and only then it can run Java function, it takes a bit longer
in reality. But when we compare it to other languages, I haven't done this. This is done
by some other guy who is more experienced with AWS Lambda than me and compared performance
in a more sophisticated way than just running on the computer or just several measurements.
He did a lot of measurements across all or various different languages, various different
run times provided by AWS Lambda. And he found out that Java basically is on the same level
as JavaScript, Python and a lot of other languages. There's not much difference. There's a small
difference that at that time C sharp was a bit slower. But as AWS improves continually,
the AWS Lambda, even these numbers would be probably better now. And C sharp and Docker
would be maybe more even with the rest because the technology running AWS Lambda is continuously
improving. But this is just to compare and show that Java itself or even the implementation
of Java AWS function or the environment isn't worse than other languages.
So now what is the problem actually? Why a lot of people perceive that Java starts very
slow? The problem, at least how I see it, is that many people don't think about Java
in this simple way, that it's a simple application. A lot of people think about Java as a language
that runs enterprise applications. And with enterprise applications we're used to use
frameworks that do a lot of job for us. We run the applications on application servers
which are slow to start. And this is what we think about when we say Java or when we
talk about Java. So now we're coming to that thing. If we basically can run our applications
that are similar to what we were used to before, but if we can start them fast, we could solve
a problem with Java cold starts, at least as we use Java now.
So the question I have now is Jakarta E or some other frameworks like Springboard or
something like that, can that be as fast as plain Java? Can we run that in AWS Lambda
to get good performance and fast startup? And the answer is there are such frameworks
and solutions to that. There are several ones. I don't have much time to talk about all of
them. So I picked one that I personally like. And it's called Piranha Cloud Framework. And
this one is based on entirely Jakarta EE APIs. Previously it was called Java EE. So it's
a very well-known API that a lot of people already know, a lot of tools out there already
use. So it's interoperable with existing code base. But the thing with Piranha Cloud
is that the implementation, actually the engine of the framework is new, very flexible, and
allows our application to start very fast. Piranha Cloud is based on a lot of existing
components. A lot of them come from the Glassfish server, which actually sort of proves that
the server is not the problem or Jakarta EE is not the problem. The components are there.
They are quite fast. But the problem how they are assembled in traditional Jakarta EE servers,
that is the problem. Because an application server usually has a lot of other things that
we don't need in Lambda, like monitoring a lot of vendor features and go on an administration
console and a lot of other things. So here's an example. It's basically nothing else than
a servlet. But this is an application using already some Jakarta EE APIs. And this application,
this servlet, you can run on any Jakarta EE server. You can run it on Tomcat. You can
run it on Glassfish. You can run it on anything that supports servlets. So the only difference
if we run it with Piranha Cloud is that it starts fast and it uses Piranha's own servlet
container, which was designed from scratch. And it's very flexible and fast. What is also
nice about Piranha's servlet container is that it can be embedded very easily. And that's
the crucial point. When we want to use Jakarta EE in Lambda, we need to basically shave off
everything that we don't need. And in AWS Lambda, we don't even need an HTTP listener. Because
AWS Lambda basically only wants a method from us that will be called returns some response.
And then AWS Lambda is responsible for mapping the HTTP request to an object that it passes
to our method. And then the returned object should be mapped to an HTTP response. And
not only HTTP requests and responses, but Lambda can handle any type of basically JSON
messages, JSON events. So the only thing that our application needs is to parse some input
object and return some output event. And with Piranha, we can create an engine and map our
servlet onto it and just listen on some object. This object is usually called or the request
cycle is invoked by a service method, which accepts a request object and returns a response
object. And this is exactly how we can use it in AWS Lambda. We just need to add one
additional layer to map AWS request object to Piranha, request object and back. If we
run Piranha Cloud, this simple servlet, which is comparable to our plain Java we were running
before, if you remember with plain Java on my computer, I had startup times. Actually,
it was not only startup times, but until the program ended and printed some message and
finished, it was around 50 milliseconds. With Piranha, it's a bit longer time, but this
already includes the first request. So it's very similar to the plain Java application.
It's not only that the engine starts, but it actually serves the request response with
text message through HTTP stack. And with that, it takes still comparable time around
130 milliseconds. Now we can compare how it works in AWS Lambda. In AWS Lambda, I have
a picture, but I hope I will be able to show you in a minute. As I said before, it takes
a bit longer when we start the function first time. Because this doesn't really matter if
we run Java or any other runtime, AWS Lambda first needs to create some environment to
execute our code in. And it takes a little bit of time. But together with creating this
environment and running our code, our example Piranha function, it takes under one second
to serve the request. Even if nothing was ready before, even on the first time we tried
to run the function, it still serves the response under one second. If we tried again, again,
again, then the response times are much faster. This is on the right side here. It's under
two milliseconds. Because this is only the code that needs to serve the request. Everything
was initialized. Environment was initialized. The Piranha engine was initialized. It's cached
in a static variable. So it's part of the process that is already live. AWS just executes
a method basically on the Piranha engine that goes through the servlet and creates the servlet
response. And that's it. That's why it takes only two milliseconds. This is only the time
required to serve the actual response. So I'll try. I think I have a link here. Hope
it works. So this is the actual AWS console where I already deployed the application,
the function. And AWS console has a nice feature called test button. With that, we can directly
invoke the lambda. Normally, we would have to create an API gateway and map it to lambda
so that we can access lambda from the HTTP from outside. AWS can also generate some URL
that we can use to invoke the lambda. But this is like directly executing the lambda
without actually invoking an HTTP request. So with this, there is some example data.
But the application doesn't read anything from the request. It just responds with some
hello world message. And if we execute it, you see it takes a bit of time. And this is
what I had in my slides. Here is even shorter. 850 milliseconds. But if we try it again,
it's already pre-warmed because AWS caches the environment. And now it's just two milliseconds.
So now the question is when the cold starts happening. They happen. I don't have an experience
how much they have an impact. I heard that it's not much of an impact because they happen
only once in a while. So the response is once in a while takes one more second. So on top
of request processing. But if it takes five seconds, which can happen with normal Spring
Boot application or traditional frameworks or even application servers, I don't know,
sometimes some application servers can be embedded. Then you can run them in AWS lambda.
But some of them really are hard to basically map to the method call. So you have to install
application server. And for that, it's not even possible to run application servers in
lambda. But if you did, it would take 10, 20 seconds with some application servers.
And that's really a difference. You pay for the execution time, but you also have exposure
users to waiting for a couple of seconds. If it's a user facing lambda. If it's not,
you maybe don't care so much. If it's something that some bad job that takes two, three minutes
to finish, then a couple of seconds don't really matter. So here's a slide about the
piranha cloud. In short, piranha cloud is basically, as I said, based on a new servlet
container designed from scratch and a lot of components built on top of it. The servlet
container being servlet implementation can run any servlet out there. And a lot of jakatai
technologies are created as servlets. So for example, Jersey, as a servlet, can be deployed
on piranha. And that's quite an easy way how to get a REST endpoint or REST library on
piranha to deploy Jersey as a servlet. And then we have everything that Jersey provides.
We can embed piranha, as I did in my demo. But we can also build a war application and
run the war application with piranha on command line. This is using jakatai distributions,
which already contain this distribution of packages, distribution of auxiliary of piranha
that are mostly used. And the last thing, it's plain Java. There's no real magic. There's
no generated code. Everything is just clean code written by clever people, I think. At
least jesing on the code there when I looked at the code, it looks like the people were
very clever. So with piranha cloud, we were able to achieve
quite fast startup times. But it still takes a couple of milliseconds, 100, 200. It depends
on how our application is complex. It may end up to two seconds, even if we add all
the jakatai functionality that piranha cloud provides. If we want to reduce that even further,
we have some general Java options to do that. We can first increase the CPU and RAM on the
lambda, which we can always do with any language. But we can also use a faster JVM. On the last
slide, I have a table where I compared running the same application with Java 11 and Java
17. If you look at the numbers, Java 17 is mostly, most of the time, a bit faster. So
just by deciding which Java version we use, we can get a bit better startup time. Then
the last option here is basically a combination. I did some experiments which options work
well regarding to the startup time or reducing the startup time. And in the end, not many
things matter. But what matters is class data sharing, which basically caches class information.
So it doesn't have to be loaded and processed in the beginning. It's already pre-computed
before a cold start. And tinkering with compiler, we can disable second level just-in-time compiler
if we want to really focus on startup time. And then there are other more magical options,
but they can even reduce performance or reduce startup time almost to zero, either compiling
the code to GraalVM with GraalVM to a native binary, which runs the application almost
instantly. Or we can use crack, which is a coordinated restore and checkpoint mechanism.
The next talk will be about it also. And what is also nice is that AWS Lambda integrated
that basically in one of their Java runtimes. And it's called SnapStart. So you can get
it for free, but only with Java 11. But hopefully Java 17 support will be coming soon. And this
works in a way that your application basically stores or you at the build time can store
checkpoints of your application with all the memory or all the information basically like
hibernates. You can hibernate your application. And then it started again and again. And cold
start and warm start in that case basically don't make a difference because they start
from the same point. That's all from me. If you have any questions, let me know. Thank
you for watching.